Hello there.
This is session 126, Optimizing
Performance Through Testing and Tracking.
My name is Vicki Murley,
and I work in the platform experience
group at Apple on performance.
So let's get right into it here.
When most people talk about
optimizing performance,
what they're really kind of talking
about is the very conventional,
very sort of typical,
retroactive approach.
And what I mean when I say that is,
you know,
we sort of all know how it works.
We're all developers here.
The software is almost finished,
but it takes 10 seconds to launch.
Or maybe it, you know,
consumes lots of memory.
Or I'm using it,
something just doesn't quite feel right.
So what happens is,
you notice these really
terrible problems,
and you turn to the wonderful tools
that we ship in the developer folder.
Such as, you know, Shark, Sampler,
Malik Debug, etc., etc.
And you try to fix, you know, the very,
very worst problems that
you may have noticed.
So this is kind of how it typically goes,
at least in my experience.
This isn't really the best idea.
For one reason, you know,
a lot of the time,
the time that you need to fix these
pretty bad performance problems isn't
necessarily built into the schedule.
As I mentioned before,
we all know how it goes.
You're working on a small team.
You're trying to get
all your features in.
You're trying to get all your bugs fixed.
Even if you have built some time
in at the end of the schedule to
specifically think about performance,
often that time can be sort of overridden
by your bug fixing time or that last
feature that you're trying to get in.
So what ends up happening is,
you fix only the worst
of the worst problems,
if even that.
You may end up fixing nothing at all.
So instead of this sort
of old conventional,
retroactive approach that
lots of people are used to,
there is actually a
different kind of approach,
and that is more of a sort
of proactive approach.
With this approach, you sort of very,
very early in the development process get
a basic version of your software working.
And at that point,
you decide that you need
to decide what to measure,
find a super easy way to measure, test,
and monitor the results.
So the tools that you use here are a
lot different from the set of profiling
tools that we mentioned earlier.
In most cases,
you're going to be deciding what to test,
so the tools are going
to be defined by you.
That's not to say that you
can't use any of the system
tools that we ship on Mac OS X,
but, you know, for the most part,
you're thinking about things before
the fact as opposed to afterwards,
so tools are defined by you.
[Transcript missing]
Why should you even
care about performance?
You know, you're developing software,
working hard.
Well, first of all,
one reason you should care is because
your competition probably cares.
If you're developing a piece of
software or an application that is
pretty much on par in terms of features
and functionality as your competitor,
Performance can give you that leg
up to make your app sort of stand
out and be better than the rest.
Also, provide a great user experience on
Mac OS X and customer satisfaction.
You know, people use your product,
find it enjoyable,
have confidence in your brand,
and want to buy more stuff
from you down the road.
[Transcript missing]
All right, getting started.
You're starting out.
You decide, OK,
I'm going to try this out.
Where do I even begin?
First thing that you want to do
is sort of decide what to test,
find an easy way to measure,
and set some goals.
So let's look at deciding what to
test in a little more in-depth.
First of all, this may seem obvious,
but I just wanted to point it out anyway.
You should always, always,
always consider launch time.
Clicking that icon in the dock or in
the finder is really your user's first
interaction with your application.
If you're taking more than three
bounces to launch in the dock,
that is not going to be a good scenario.
I know this happens all over the place.
Apple applications aren't excluded,
but when an application like this laggard
here takes about 10 seconds to launch,
what's going on there?
It's almost personally
offensive to me to see that.
One reason it's so offensive is
because launch time is probably one
of the easiest things you can measure.
You can just mock up a little script,
spit out a log, you're good to go.
You're measuring launch time.
Boom.
Doesn't take long at all.
Secondly,
you're going to be looking around,
deciding what to test,
and you're going to see that, hey,
you know, there are some bad things.
There are some benchmarks out there,
some benchmarks available.
Be careful.
Improving the floating point operation
from spec is not necessarily going to
make Safari load web pages any faster.
It's kind of will make you seem
like you're making progress,
but really,
when you're looking at these sort
of existing benchmarks out there,
you have to evaluate their
relevance and investigate them
thoroughly to see if they apply to
what you're actually trying to do.
So instead of sort of using
these existing benchmarks,
one really great idea is to sort of
focus on the most frequent and important
user actions for your application.
You might even put this in terms
of sort of your flagship feature.
For Safari, we're loading web pages.
Not that complicated.
If you're an RSS reader, you want to,
you know, read and render RSS feeds.
If you're a photo browser,
you want to load and display photos.
What is the purpose of your application?
That is the thing that
you want to focus on here.
Before I get started about, you know,
deciding,
talking about how to create your
test and how to define your test,
I wanted to point out you're
going to be testing often,
very often,
probably more than you're used to.
And for this reason,
the test that you create to test
performance should be incredibly,
incredibly, incredibly easy to use.
First of all,
it should be accessible to every
engineer who is working on the project,
and it should be accessible to
everyone who is working on the project.
Secondly, you do not want to have a long,
complicated setup process.
It should be one time.
You never have to do it again.
It shouldn't take that long.
Easy is the key here.
To execute things, it should just be one
click or one command.
And lastly, the test should not
take that long to run.
If I am trying to make a code
change and test performance in the
process of making that code change,
I don't want to say, all right,
I've got my change ready.
Now I'm going to test performance.
Three hours later, I'll have the result.
It's absolutely unacceptable.
No one's going to run a tool like that.
No one changing the
code wants to do that.
So make sure the total time that
it takes to run the test is low.
Got my change ready.
Now I'm going to test Performance.
Three hours later, I'll have the result.
It's absolutely unacceptable.
No one's going to run a tool like that.
No one changing the
code wants to do that.
So make sure the total time that
it takes to run the test is low.
So that was a really great thing
for us to focus on because we
found that by focusing on time,
as opposed to focusing on time
and memory or time and whatever,
if time got worse,
then that could indicate
a larger problem.
Maybe we slowed down today and
that's because we have a horrible
memory leak or something like that.
So if you're on a small team looking
to get up and running quickly,
time is a great thing to focus on first.
So time is a really great thing
for us to focus on because we
found that by focusing on time,
as opposed to focusing on time
and memory or time and whatever,
if time got worse,
then that could indicate
a larger problem.
Maybe we slowed down today and
that's because we have a horrible
memory leak or something like that.
So if you're on a small team looking
to get up and running quickly,
time is a great thing to focus on first.
Hi, hi, thanks.
The Safari page load test is really
a great example of the things
Vicki has been talking about.
It's a test.
It's simple, easy to run,
built right into the application.
It gives you test results back very,
very quickly.
So I'd like to give you a look.
Now,
when I say that the page load test is
built into every version of Safari,
I really do mean every version of Safari,
including the ones if you've
got a laptop out there.
You've got the page load test.
It actually ships out on the DVD.
Now,
the one thing you need to do to enable
it is turn on the Safari debug menu.
Now, if you're not familiar with this,
you can just turn it on with
a simple default right there.
If you can't read that,
you can just search in
Google Safari debug menu.
You'll find out how to do this.
And so now that I've turned this on,
I launch Safari, and you'll notice now at
the end of the menu bar,
I've got this new menu,
which has a number of interesting
features in it that we used
over time to develop Safari.
And some interesting things
that let you look at DOM trees,
render trees, and things like that.
Well, one of the things over here is
the Safari page load test window.
So for bring this up,
it brings up this very,
very simple window.
With a list of URLs in it,
and all I need to do to get
it going is click start,
and it'll go through and load
all of the web pages in the list.
Now, you know,
one of the things about the
Safari page load test is,
you know, when I say it's simple to use,
well, it really must be simple,
because here I am trying
to think of what to say.
I don't want to mess up or whatever.
I can still run the page load test.
So it really is just that
simple to get going and use.
Now,
now that it's actually finished running,
I want to point out that
just down here at the bottom,
I know it's a little
bit difficult to see,
but there's just one number here,
just one line of information
down here in the lower right.
And this is the one number
that we use to really,
you know, as our takeaway from
running the page load test.
It's one number,
which is just a little statistical work,
which is how long did it take to
load each one of those web pages.
So now if I go again,
it's actually... 317 milliseconds.
If we kind of go and take a look,
we can see, yeah, it's a, you know,
sort of about that fast.
So now, you know,
about the page load test and, you know,
how it becomes useful to us.
Well, one of the thing,
one of the big characteristics
about it is that it's done.
It exists.
When I, you know, I, you know,
set about writing this tool, well,
you know, I think the, you know,
a kind of the engineer tendency might be,
well, I'm going to go and I'm going
to make this whole engine.
And I'll have this infrastructure
and I'll have these pieces.
I have this database and this test
suite and everything like that.
Well, you know,
something like that might never
get done because of the press of
the other work that you need to do.
And so I just coded this up.
It took, you know,
a day or two to get this going.
The fact that it's built in, you know,
Vicky, you know, quite, quite honestly,
now we've discovered it over time.
It's a really virtue to
have this thing built in.
But honestly, I've got to tell you,
I was just too lazy to kind
of make a framework and expose
APIs and make a separate test.
Program and things like that.
So I just built it into the
Safari application because it was
the easiest way to get at the guts
of Safari and get it to go to another
URL once it was done loading one.
But it actually turns
out to be this great,
great benefit because now if
you've got the source code,
you've got the test.
You don't have to worry about
gathering up a different piece.
And as you can see, again,
as I've already pointed out,
it's easy to run and that it
produces this one key result when
you're done that allows you very,
very quickly,
if you've made a code change,
this is really one of
the ways how we use it.
As we go and make a code change
and we're ready to check it in,
run the page load test.
You saw it's simple, quick,
and easy to do.
So now I've made that code change.
I can now confirm that it
doesn't hurt performance.
Or maybe it did hurt performance and boy,
I'd better not check that in or else,
you know,
Vicki will tell you a little bit
about how we handle regressions.
But, you know, it just saves you a lot
of trouble to go back and,
you know,
later try to figure out where the
regression may be kept into the
tree if you didn't run the test.
And so one of the other things that
it does is it lets you experiment.
If you've got a code change and maybe you
go and you're focusing in on performance,
you say, well, I'm going to try to
speed up page rendering.
I'm going to try to speed
up HTML performance.
And so you can go and make
that change and then very,
very quickly turn it around and
see whether or not that code change
actually did what you intended it to do.
And so just kind of in closing up,
I mean, the page load test has been,
you know, really,
really the essential tool that
we've used over the years to
improve page load performance.
Just simple, easy to run,
gives us that one result that we can
compare to results that have come
before and really lets us track and
keep our eyes on making the changes.
making the browser faster.
So that's it.
Thank you.
Okay, thanks Ken.
The two things that I want
to stress about this,
about the page load test, A,
it took a day and a half to code up
and we're using it five years later,
and B, it's extremely easy to use.
If it hadn't been easy to use,
no one would be using it today.
You know, made back in 2001,
we're still using it today.
Super useful.
Okay.
So once you've got your tool together,
you can think about setting some goals.
And one way to think about this is to
compare directly with your competitors.
For us, this meant comparing against
Mozilla-based browsers,
like at the time it was Camino,
now it's Firefox, and Mac IE,
which had the largest browser
share on the Mac at the time.
Hard to believe, but true.
We were lucky in that we found a sort
of networked version of the page load
test where we could compare directly
in other browsers with the same test,
but a lot of the time,
that's not going to be possible.
So hand timings are sometimes necessary.
It sounds like a pain, but really,
it's something that you do once,
you have the baseline,
you're not trying to get
a super exact number,
you're just trying to see
if you're in the ballpark.
Also, if you have a tool that's built
directly into the software,
you can't build that tool right
into your competitor's software.
So, as I said,
hand timings are sometimes necessary,
but luckily,
you only have to do them once.
So, yeah.
[Transcript missing]
So, just to go over what
we just talked about,
you want to decide what to test,
find an easy way to measure,
and set some goals.
That's kind of how you're going to
get started with this whole thing.
Once you have all those things done,
it's time to test.
As I mentioned before,
you're going to be testing pretty often,
but if you've kind of followed
the principles and practices
that we've set out so far,
you're going to have a tool
that's really easy to use.
So it's not going to
be as bad as you think.
In this section,
we're going to talk about when to test,
checkpoint testing,
and your test environment
that you may want to set up.
So first of all, when should I test?
I have this tool.
Well,
you should really test before committing
any code changes to the repository.
Like I said, this may sound like a pain,
but if you've got a tool
that's super easy to run,
there's really no reason not to.
Not just code changes that
may affect performance either.
Any code change, test them all.
Of course, this includes during
new feature development.
Feature development is the
worst time for bad performance
regression sneaking into your code,
so you definitely want to test then.
And lastly,
for those rare occasions when each
individual engineer may forget to test
before checking in their code change,
it's sometimes a good idea,
it's usually a good idea to set up a
dedicated test machine where you can
build the source on a daily basis,
test things out,
and see what the results are.
So let's talk about that
daily testing for a second.
Everyone is going to be running
the performance test before
they're checking in code,
but sometimes it's useful to have
this sort of safety net as well.
So you have to think about what kind
of environment do I want to use?
For us, it was really useful to
choose a slow machine.
At the time when we started this,
the 800 megahertz iMac was sort of
the standard level consumer machine.
That's G4, iMac 800 megahertz, very slow.
And what we learned was, as time went on,
different engineers on the
team would get new hardware,
and Dave would say, "Hey,
I totally tested performance before
I checked in this code change.
I have a dual 2 gigahertz
G5," or whatever.
And I'd be able to say, "Well,
you know what?
I do see a performance regression
on the old slow iMac." So,
and then you have to think about
what you're going to do with that.
And that was very helpful for us.
It helped us identify those super
small regressions that we didn't
want to let slip through the cracks.
In addition,
you also want to make sure that
the environment you set up is
really a controlled environment.
By that,
I mean that you want to eliminate
any variants that may creep in
during testing in order to understand
the results that you're seeing.
What I mean by that is, I test on Monday.
I test on Tuesday.
We look 5% slower.
The number is 5% higher.
Am I seeing a genuine
performance regression,
or am I seeing, oh,
Spotlight was running,
or something like that?
Really, to make this work,
you're going to want to aim for a
variance of about 1%. If you don't
achieve 1%, you're going to miss those
small 2% and 3% gains that you might get,
which could really add up over time
to a big performance improvement.
So in terms of setting up
this controlled environment,
there's a few big ones
and a few small ones.
First of all, Spotlight, it's a huge one.
If your app doesn't depend on it,
turn it off.
Demons on the system, again,
if your software doesn't depend on it,
turn that off as well.
Network activity,
if your app doesn't depend on it,
it can go.
This is an interesting one because it
also sort of illustrates the point that
you can also set up a closed network.
It's not to say that you have to
eliminate all network activity entirely,
but you do need to create
a sort of consistent,
controlled environment.
We also found that sometimes inconsistent
user settings could cause variance.
Bookmark files of different size,
history files of different sizes could
have varying impacts on performance.
And we wanted to know exactly what
we were looking at every single day.
Like I said,
is this a genuine performance regression
or did the history file get bigger?
So wipe those out every time.
And lastly, you know,
beyond the sort of big three and,
you know, the user settings,
it's really a sort of iterative
and investigative process.
You're going to be running this test,
checking out the results.
You may see a little bit
of variance here and there,
and it'll take a little
bit of investigation.
Maybe there's some variance in the
code that's running in your app,
et cetera, et cetera,
but you can narrow those
things down over time.
So, once you have a controlled
environment set up,
you can start tracking your results.
Once you have your test set up,
By this, you may be thinking, okay,
now's the time when we're going
to start creating charts or,
you know,
getting a database together or whatever,
but that's not what we're
going to talk about.
Really, there are only three numbers
that you really care about.
Yesterday's number, today's number,
and your goal.
I tested yesterday,
or I tested before my code change.
I tested today,
or I tested after my code change.
Am I faster, or am I slower?
You can make this work on
a change-by-change basis.
The test is super easy to run.
We saw the page load test.
And, you know, of course you want to keep
your goal in mind because you
want to know how close you are.
But, you know, it's not to say that
charting your results or,
you know,
graphs or anything like that are not
useful because they most certainly are.
Especially to the people who
are managing your project.
But for you as a developer,
when you're thinking about performance,
you know,
this is a pretty easy way to do things.
When you're looking at yesterday's
number versus today's number,
or sort of pre-change
versus post-change number,
it's an interesting thing to
actually look at the percentage
delta as opposed to the raw number.
You may say, OK, well,
I only slowed down by 10 milliseconds.
Whatever, no problem.
But 10 milliseconds,
if your test only takes
100 milliseconds to run,
that's a 10% regression.
So that's huge.
Lastly, it's often useful to
compare against a baseline.
Let's say your variance in your
test is around like 2 or 3 percent,
and so you're testing on a daily basis,
and you see maybe a 2 percent
change here and there,
and you think, oh,
it must be just variance, whatever.
If it's not variance,
and it turns out to be
a genuine regression,
these things can stack up over time.
So it's a good idea to know your
starting point and sort of make
sure that you don't go above
a certain baseline over time.
And of course, that baseline has to be
adjusted here and there,
but it's a great idea to
sort of guard against those,
you know, sort of small little one-off
slowdowns that may creep in if
you're not watching closely.
So for testing,
we want to test before committing.
So before committing any code change,
set up a safety net, and lastly,
stay vigilant.
Now, we have our tool together.
We've been testing our
faces off all the time.
When I check in a code change,
we're testing daily.
It's not that hard because it's
built right into the software.
But what happens when we have
a performance regression?
Well, in this section,
we're going to talk about some
tips for handling regressions.
And we're also going to talk about the
lessons that we learned over time in
dealing with these sorts of things.
So when it comes to handling
performance regressions,
there's really only one
tip that you need to know.
And that is that you should have zero
tolerance for performance regressions.
So what do I mean exactly
when I say zero tolerance?
Well, for us on the Safari team,
it meant that if we
came in in the morning,
tried out our safety net,
and saw that we were
slower than the day before,
the source tree was closed
until that problem was resolved.
So then what we would do is start
looking at all the code changes
that occurred in the last 24 hours.
Sometimes you can look
through that list and say,
oh, I think it might be this one that has
to do with text layout or this one
that has to do with image rendering.
Seems like that could impact performance.
But a lot of times,
this just turned out to be
a plain old binary search.
Build the tree at one point in time.
Test.
Check the result.
Build at another point in time.
Test again.
And that was the way that we were able to
find the specific code change that caused
the regression that we were looking for.
So what would typically happen is,
as I said, you come in in the morning,
run the test, see a regression.
And then maybe I'd send out
a little email that says,
hey, everybody,
there's been a performance regression.
Just wanted to let you know.
I'm working to track it down,
but the tree's closed for now.
Cheers, Vicki.
Nine minutes later,
I would get this sort of thing.
Hey, is the tree open yet?
Nineteen minutes later, hey,
when's the tree going to be open?
Hey, I have these bug fixes in my tree.
I totally would like to
check them in sometime soon.
What's up?
Is the tree open?
An hour later,
people start to get a little ticked off.
I hate you, you know, was pretty typical.
I didn't want to put that up there, but,
you know, people start to get crazy.
So, you know, for me,
sending out this email, this was kind of,
you know, hard to deal with, but luckily,
I had the backing of the boss plus 15.
So you can see how that really helped.
What happens is, you know,
we have sort of this
zero tolerance policy.
The source tree is closed.
People are upset.
Let's just say upset.
They want the tree open again.
So what ends up happening is a
performance regression becomes a
sort of all-hands-on-deck scenario.
And it's amazing when you have, you know,
three or five or seven really
smart people looking at a problem.
It can get solved very, very quickly.
A matter of, you know, minutes at times.
So that worked out really well for us.
Secondly, no exceptions.
Oh,
I moved us over to using this new API.
Oh, I added this feature or whatever.
No, no, no exceptions.
So in dealing with these
performance regressions over
years and years and years,
there were a lot of
things that we learned.
First of all,
we learned that fixing a performance
problem is easier and more effective
when you know the exact cause.
We have all these code changes.
This is the one.
This one, I don't know where it is.
This is it.
But anyway, what I mean is,
you saw before we started doing
the binary search to find out which
code change caused the problem.
Once that's identified,
I know exactly what to do to speed it up.
Or maybe I know exactly what I did wrong
to make it slow in the first place.
So that's one huge benefit.
The second great benefit is,
if you're not looking at the exact
code change that caused the problem,
what you end up doing is you sort of say,
okay, we're slower.
Let me run shark or
whatever during the test,
and I'll just knock off the top thing.
Well, that sort of knocking off the
top thing should really be saved.
I mean, not saved,
but it's really useful to do
that at a time when you're
really focusing on performance.
If you do that,
sort of knock off the top thing
instead of knocking off your
change that caused the regression,
the change that caused the
regression is still in the tree,
making things slower.
And that's bad.
Secondly,
we learned that the complexity of
the problem increases as time passes.
And when I say that, I mean that,
you know, I check in code that slows
everything down and nobody notices.
So then Ken checks in code
that relies on my code.
And then John checks in code
that relies on Ken's code,
which relies on my code.
And as time wears on,
by time I don't mean weeks, I mean a day.
You know, it becomes harder and harder
to sort of extricate that
problem from your source code.
Solving those problems
quickly was huge for us.
Thirdly, I mentioned before,
you are going to spend, if you're lucky,
some time actually
optimizing performance.
And you want those intentional
optimizations to actually be meaningful.
By that, I mean, okay,
let's say I looked at the page load
test and I made it almost 30% faster.
And then we're watching
performance on a daily basis,
so it stays low.
If I'm not watching performance,
you could end up with
something like this.
Your 30% optimization,
let's say each one of those
dots corresponds to a week.
The optimization that you may
have spent four weeks doing is
gone in about a month and a half.
And those dots that are
going upward there aren't
necessarily huge regressions.
They all denote a 5% regression.
So it can really creep up on you.
That's why you want to be watching.
Next, this one's kind of interesting too.
We also learned that by not slowing down,
we actually got faster by
not doing any work at all.
You may fix a bug and actually
be fixing a performance problem,
or you may fix a bug that has nothing
at all to do with performance,
and your code change just happens
to make things like 2 or 3% faster.
So,
if you're not sort of watching things,
this is sort of the data or the
graph that you would never see.
Like, one day we got a little bit faster,
but then the next two days
we got a little bit slower,
and then we got faster again,
and then we got slower.
Well, if we're watching every day,
and we're guarding against these sort of
2 or 3% regressions that can creep in,
our graph is going to
look more like this.
This is that same graph with all
of those little upticks eliminated.
And the result is a 10% performance.
So, we're going to be able to fix a
bug that has nothing at all to
do with performance gain without
really doing anything at all.
And that was really helpful to us.
Another thing, I mentioned this before,
new features do not have
to impact performance.
It's really easy to say, "Well,
I added more code.
I added this functionality," etc.,
etc., but those new features,
there's no reason they
should impact performance.
If you've really, really,
really investigated and done
everything you can to make sure that
your changes are having as small of
an impact as possible on performance,
then one thing that you
might want to consider is,
let's say my change impacted performance
by 20%. I went and looked at it.
I fixed a bunch of things up.
Now it's like 5%. I still have
that 5% regression in the tree,
so what I might want to do is go and
try to speed something else up by 5%.
You want to keep that baseline steady,
even when you're adding features.
Lastly, this was also very important.
No sacred cows.
Everyone sort of has that
piece of code on their project.
Maybe you bought the
code from another vendor,
or it's that code that that super
smart guy wrote like two years ago,
and no one has touched it since then,
and everyone's kind of, you know,
scared of it.
You should dive right in there.
That part of the code is
not immune to being slow,
basically.
So don't be afraid of it.
So, just to sort of recap what we went
over with performance regressions,
do your best to adhere to a zero
tolerance policy and remember
all the things that we talked
about are lessons learned.
So, you know,
we went through all this stuff.
What actually happened?
Did it actually work?
Well, absolutely it did.
You know,
if we look at JavaScript performance
during Safari 1.0 development,
we improved, we made it 16 times faster.
It's a lot faster.
For HTML load speed,
we made it 10 times faster.
Incredibly fast.
When we went from Safari 1.0 on
Jaguar to Safari 1.1 on Panther,
we got 30% faster.
And that was sort of without even trying.
This was one of those scenarios where
we were just sort of checking in
little 2 and 3% speedups inadvertently.
And over time, you know,
each release is a year.
Over time, those really stacked up
with us doing a lot of work.
And we were doing almost no work at all.
I actually remember, you know,
Panther coming out and sort of reading
the feedback online and people said,
wow, you know, Safari feels a lot faster.
And that was great.
So, in closing, you really can,
I hope I've gotten it
across to you today,
that you really can develop high
performance software by following a
few simple principles and practices.
You do a little bit of work up front
and get some vigilant testing in there.
And, you know, also,
all the things that we've talked
about today are simple enough
that you can sort of leave this
talk and actually start today.
So, that's it.